WEEDS USED IN MEDICINE ***

  TRANSCRIBER’S NOTE

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.

  Bold text is denoted by =equal signs=.

  Some minor changes to the text are noted at the end of the book.




                    U. S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE.

                       FARMERS’ BULLETIN No. 188.

                         WEEDS USED IN MEDICINE.

                                   BY

                              ALICE HENKEL,

          _Assistant in Drug and Medicinal Plant Investigations,
               Botanical Investigations and Experiments,
                       Bureau of Plant Industry_.

                       [Illustration: USDA Seal]

                               WASHINGTON:
                       GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE.
                                  1904.




                         LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL


                      U. S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE,
                                   BUREAU OF PLANT INDUSTRY,
                                              OFFICE OF THE CHIEF,
                                 _Washington, D. C., December 10, 1903_.

SIR: I have the honor to transmit herewith a paper on Weeds Used in
Medicine, and recommend that it be published as a Farmers’ Bulletin.
This paper was prepared by Miss Alice Henkel, Assistant in Drug and
Medicinal Plant Investigations, and was submitted by the Botanist with
a view to publication.

     Respectfully,                                B. T. GALLOWAY,
                                                      _Chief of Bureau_.
  Hon. JAMES WILSON,
       _Secretary of Agriculture_.




                               CONTENTS.


                                                                   Page.

  Introduction                                                         7

  Collection and curing of drugs                                       7

  Roots                                                                8

  Barks                                                                9

  Leaves and herbs                                                     9

  Flowers                                                             10

  Seeds                                                               10

  Disposal of the drugs                                               10

  Descriptions of plants                                              10

  Burdock                                                             11

  Dandelion                                                           13

  Docks                                                               15

  Yellow dock                                                         15

  Broad-leaved dock                                                   16

  Yellow-rooted water dock                                            18

  Dock roots                                                          18

  Couch grass                                                         19

  Pokeweed                                                            20

  Foxglove                                                            22

  Mullein                                                             24

  Lobelia                                                             26

  Tansy                                                               27

  Gum plant                                                           28

  Scaly grindelia                                                     29

  Boneset                                                             30

  Catnip                                                              31

  Hoarhound                                                           32

  Blessed thistle                                                     34

  Yarrow                                                              35

  Canada fleabane                                                     36

  Jimson weed                                                         37

  Purple thorn-apple                                                  39

  Poison hemlock                                                      39

  American wormseed                                                   41

  Black mustard                                                       42

  White mustard                                                       44




                             ILLUSTRATIONS.


                                                                   Page.

  Fig.  1. Burdock, flowering plant                                   11

        2. Burdock, first year’s growth                               12

        3. Dandelion                                                  13

        4. Dandelion root                                             14

        5. Yellow dock, first year’s growth                           15

        6. Broad-leaved dock, first year’s growth                     16

        7. Leaf, fruiting spike, and root of broad-leaved dock        17

        8. Yellow dock root                                           18

        9. Couch grass                                                19

       10. Pokeweed                                                   21

       11. Pokeweed, flowering and fruiting branch                    22

       12. Pokeroot                                                   22

       13. Foxglove                                                   23

       14. Mullein                                                    25

       15. Lobelia                                                    26

       16. Tansy                                                      28

       17. Gum plant                                                  28

       18. Scaly grindelia                                            29

       19. Boneset                                                    30

       20. Catnip                                                     32

       21. Hoarhound                                                  33

       22. Hoarhound, flowering top                                   34

       23. Blessed thistle                                            35

       24. Yarrow                                                     36

       25. Canada fleabane                                            37

       26. Jimson weed                                                38

       27. Leaves, flower, and capsules of jimson weed                39

       28. Poison hemlock                                             40

       29. American wormseed                                          41

       30. Black mustard                                              43

       31. White mustard                                              44




  B. P. I.—89.                                            B. I. E.—55.

                        WEEDS USED IN MEDICINE.




                             INTRODUCTION.


It is a matter of interest, primarily to the farmer, that certain of
the well-known weeds now either generally or locally infesting the
country are the sources of crude drugs at the present time obtained
wholly or in part by importation from abroad. Roots, leaves, and
flowers of several of the species most detrimental in the United States
are gathered, prepared, and cured in Europe, and not only form useful
commodities there but supply to a considerable extent the demands of
foreign lands. Hence it appears probable that while weeds can hardly
be made desirable, still in his fight to exterminate them the farmer
may be able to turn some of them to account. Some of the plants
coming within this class are in many States at present subject to
antiweed laws and farmers are required to take measures toward their
extermination. It seems, therefore, desirable to make these pests
sources of profit where possible. In many cases, when weeds have been
dug, the work of handling and curing them is not excessive and can
readily be done by women and children.

The prices paid for crude drugs from these sources are not great and
would rarely tempt anyone to pursue this line of work as a business.
Yet, if in ridding the farm of weeds and thus raising the value of the
land the farmer can at the same time make these pests the source of a
small income instead of a dead loss, something is gained.

In order to help the farmer to obtain the best possible prices for such
products, instructions for collecting and preparing crude drugs derived
from weeds are here briefly given. The collector should observe them
carefully.




                    COLLECTION AND CURING OF DRUGS.


Too much emphasis can not be placed upon the importance of carefully
and thoroughly drying all crude drugs, whether roots, herbs, leaves,
barks, flowers, or seeds. If insufficiently dried, they will heat
and become moldy in shipping, and the collector will find his goods
rejected by the drug dealer and have all his trouble for nothing.

Another important matter to be considered in collecting drugs for
market is freedom from foreign substances. All drugs should be clean
and wholesome looking and contain no admixture of fragments of other
plants, stones, dirt, or other impurities. A bright natural color is
extremely desirable in leaves, herbs, and flowers, and adds much to
the salability of the product. This can be readily brought about by
giving careful attention to proper drying in the shade (not in direct
sunlight), and by protection from dew or rain by placing the drugs
under cover at nightfall or whenever necessary. Roots may be cleaned by
washing, but leaves, herbs, and flowers should never be washed.

It is important also to collect drugs in proper season only. Neglect in
this respect will bring nothing but disappointment to the gatherer, as
drugs collected out of season not only are not acceptable to the dealer
on account of inferior medicinal qualities, but there will also be, in
the case of roots, a greater amount of shrinkage in a root dug during
the growing season than will take place when it is collected after
growth has ceased.

The collector should be sure that the plant he is collecting is the
right one. There are many plants that closely resemble one another,
yet one may possess medicinal properties and the other be absolutely
useless. Again, a plant may contain very poisonous principles, and if
represented to be something else, it might of course do untold injury.
It would therefore be best, where any doubt exists, to send a specimen
of the entire plant, including leaves, flowers, and fruits, to a drug
dealer or to the nearest State experiment station for identification.


                                 ROOTS.

Roots should never be collected during the growing season, as at that
time they are deficient in medicinal properties, and they also shrink
more in drying and weigh less than when gathered at full maturity.

The roots of annual plants should be dug just before the flowering
period, and those of biennial or perennial plants after the tops have
dried, the former in the autumn of the first year and the latter in the
fall of the second or third year.

After the roots have been dug the adherent soil should be well
shaken from them, and all foreign particles, such as stones, dirt,
roots and parts of other plants, should be removed. If the roots
can not be sufficiently cleared of soil by shaking, they should be
thoroughly washed in clean water. It does not pay to be careless in
this matter. The presence of soil increases the weight of the roots,
but the intending purchaser is not willing to pay for the weight of
the dirt, and grades the uncleaned drug accordingly. It is the clean,
bright-looking root that will bring a good price.

After washing, the roots should be carefully dried. This can best be
accomplished by exposing them to light and air (not direct sunlight) on
racks or shelves, or on clean, well-ventilated barn floors or lofts.
They should be spread out thinly and turned occasionally from day to
day until completely cured. When this point is reached, in perhaps
three to six weeks, the roots will snap readily when bent. During the
curing process the roots, if dried out of doors, should be placed under
shelter at night and upon the approach of rainy weather.

With some roots additional preparation is required, such as slicing and
the removal of fibrous rootlets. Wherever this is necessary mention
will be made of it under the descriptions of the different plants. In
general, it may be said that large roots should always be split or
sliced when green in order to facilitate drying.


                                 BARKS.

The plants considered in this bulletin do not furnish medicinal barks,
but inasmuch as there are certain sections of the country where trees
furnishing such barks are rather abundant, directions for their
collection may not be out of place here.

Barks of trees should be gathered in spring, when the sap begins to
flow, but may also be peeled in winter. In the case of the coarser
barks (as elm, hemlock, poplar, oak, pine, and wild cherry) the outer
layer is shaved off before the bark is removed from the tree, which
process is known as “rossing.” Only the inner bark of these trees is
used medicinally. Barks may also be cured by exposure to sunlight.
Moisture must be avoided.


                           LEAVES AND HERBS.

Leaves and herbs should be collected when the plants are in full
flower. It is very desirable that they retain their bright green color
after curing, and this can be done by careful drying in the shade. In
the collection of leaves the whole plant may be cut and the leaves
may be stripped from it, rejecting the stems as much as possible. In
the case of herbs the coarse and large stems should be rejected and
only the flowering tops and more tender stems and leaves included. All
grasses, bits of other plants, and other foreign substances should be
carefully removed, as well as dead, shriveled, diseased, and discolored
specimens.

Both leaves and herbs should be spread out in thin layers on clean
floors, racks or shelves, in the shade but where there is free
circulation of air, and turned frequently until thoroughly dry.
Moisture will darken them. The same precautions that are necessary in
curing roots apply here also, so far as placing them under cover to
avoid dew or rain is concerned.


                                FLOWERS.

Flowers are collected when they first open or immediately after—not
when they are beginning to fade. To preserve the bright natural color
as nearly as possible they should be carefully dried in the shade, in
the same manner as directed for leaves and herbs.


                                 SEEDS.

Seeds should be gathered just as they are ripening, before the seed
pods open, and should be winnowed in order to remove fragments of
stems, leaves, and shriveled specimens.




                         DISPOSAL OF THE DRUGS.


Samples representative of the lot of drugs to be sold should be sent
to the nearest commission merchant, general store, or drug store,
for inspection and for quotation on the amount of drug that can be
furnished, or for information as to where to send the article. The
size of the sample depends, of course, upon the kind of drug; from
3 to 4 ounces—or, say, at least a good handful—should be submitted.
The package containing the sample should be plainly marked as regards
contents, and the name and address of the sender given. In writing to
the different dealers for information and prices, it should be stated
how large a quantity of a particular drug can be furnished and how
soon this can be supplied, and postage should always be inclosed for
reply. In no case should the entire lot of collected drugs be sent to
dealers without preliminary correspondence. The collector should bear
in mind that freight is an important item, and it is best, therefore,
to address such dealers as are nearest to the place of production. When
ready for shipment, crude drugs may be tightly packed in burlap or
gunny sacks, or in dry, clean barrels.




                        DESCRIPTIONS OF PLANTS.


The plants included in this bulletin are burdock, dandelion, the docks,
couch grass, and pokeweed (principally root drugs); foxglove, mullein,
lobelia, tansy, gum plant, scaly grindelia, boneset, catnip, hoarhound,
yarrow, fleabane, blessed thistle, jimson weed, and poison hemlock (of
which either the leaves, flowers, herb, or seeds are used in medicine);
and also wormseed, and black and white mustards, of which the seeds
only are used.

Descriptions of these plants follow, together with the common names
by which they are known in different localities, the habitat (or, in
other words, the kinds of places or soils in which they are likely to
be found), their geographical range, information as to the parts to be
collected, their uses, the extent to which they are imported and the
prices usually paid by dealers.

The principal uses for which these plants are employed in medicine are
briefly indicated, but none of the drugs mentioned should be taken
without the advice of a physician.

With the exception of the figures for dandelion and mustard, which were
obtained from the Bureau of Statistics of the Department of Commerce
and Labor, the imports are based on estimates furnished by dealers,
and the prices per pound, while serving to give an idea as to what
may be expected for the drugs, will vary from year to year, depending
principally upon supply and demand.

There are of course a large number of plants used in medicine that are
not included in this bulletin, which is intended to cover only such
medicinal plants as may be classed as weeds.


                                BURDOCK.
                           _Arctium lappa_ L.

=Other common names.=—Cockle button, cuckold dock, beggars’ buttons,
hurr-bur, stick button, hardock, and bardane. (Fig. 1.)

[Illustration: FIG. 1.—Burdock (_Arctium lappa_ L.). Flowering plant.]

=Habitat and range.=—Burdock is one of the most common weeds. It was
introduced from the Old World, and is common and often very abundant in
the Eastern and Central States and in some scattered localities in the
West, growing along roadsides, in fields, pastures, and waste places.

=Description.=—This is a coarse, unsightly biennial weed of the aster
family (Asteraceæ), which produces during the first year of its growth
only a rosette of large, thin leaves (fig. 2) and a long, tapering
root having a diameter of from one-half to 1 inch. When full grown it
measures from 3 to 7 feet high. The round, fleshy stem is branched,
grooved, and hairy, with very large leaves, even in the early stages
of the growth of the plant, the lower leaves often measuring 18 inches
in length. The leaves are alternate, on long, solid, deeply furrowed
leafstalks; thin, roundish or oval, but usually heart-shaped; with
even, wavy, or toothed margins; smooth above, and pale and woolly on
the under surface. The flowers are purple, in small, clustered heads,
appearing in the second year, from July to frost. These flower heads
are armed with hooked tips, and the burs thus formed are a great pest,
attaching themselves to clothing and to the wool and hair of animals.
The seed of burdock is produced in great abundance, one plant bearing
as many as 400,000 seeds.

=Parts used.=—The root alone is recognized in the United States
Pharmacopœia, but there is a limited demand for burdock seed, and the
leaves also are employed. Burdock roots and seeds are used in blood
and skin diseases, and the leaves externally as a cooling poultice for
swellings and ulcers, the latter being employed only in the fresh state.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.—Burdock. First year’s growth.]

Burdock has a large taproot, about 12 inches long, fleshy, the outside
blackish-brown or grayish-brown, the inside light in color and spongy
in the center. It is to be collected in the fall of the first year. The
roots must be washed, split lengthwise, and carefully dried. Drying
causes the root to lose about four-fifths of its weight, and to become
scaly, and wrinkled lengthwise. Sometimes the bases of the leafstalks
remain at the top of the root in the form of a small, white, silky
tuft. The odor of the root is weak and unpleasant.

The seeds are oblong, curved, flattened, and angular, dark brown
and sometimes spotted with black, and have no odor. These should be
collected when ripe or nearly so.

=Imports and prices.=—About 50,000 pounds of lappa or burdock root are
imported annually, and the best root is said to come from Belgium,
where great care is exercised in its collection.

The price of the root ranges from 3 to 8 cents per pound, and that of
the seed from 5 to 10 cents.


                               DANDELION.
   _Taraxacum taraxacum_ (L.) Karst. (_Taraxacum officinale_ Weber.)

[Illustration: FIG. 3.—Dandelion (_Taraxacum taraxacum_ (L.) Karst).
(An unusually fibrous root.)]

=Other common names.=—Blow-ball, cankerwort, doon-head-clock,
fortune-teller, horse gowan, Irish daisy, yellow gowan, one o’clock.
(Fig. 3.)

=Range and habitat.=—Dandelion is distributed as a weed in all
civilized parts of the world, and in this country is naturalized from
Europe. With the exception of the South, it is very abundant throughout
the United States in fields and waste places, and it is especially
troublesome in lawns and meadows.

[Illustration: FIG. 4.—Dandelion root, 16 inches long.]

=Description.=—The dandelion is so well known a weed, especially in
lawns, that it scarcely requires a description, almost everyone being
familiar with its rosette of coarsely toothed leaves, golden-yellow
flowers, and round fluffy seed heads. It is a perennial plant of the
chicory family (Cichoriaceæ), and it may be said to be in flower
throughout almost the entire year. In spring the young leaves are
collected and used for greens or salad, but the part employed in
medicine is the root. The flowering stem of the dandelion is usually
longer than the smooth, shining green, coarsely toothed leaves,
reaching a height of from 5 to 10 inches. It is erect, smooth, naked,
and hollow, bearing at the summit a solitary yellow flower head,
which opens in the morning and only in fair weather. The entire plant
contains a white, milky juice.

=Part used.=—As already stated, the root of dandelion is used
medicinally. It is a large taproot, sometimes 20 inches long, thick
and fleshy, dull-yellow or brownish on the outside, white inside,
practically without odor, and bitter. (Fig. 4.) Dandelion is often used
as a tonic in diseases of the liver and in dyspepsia.

The best time for digging dandelion root is from July to September,
during which time the milky juice becomes thicker and the bitterness
increases. It should be carefully washed and thoroughly dried.
Dandelion roots decrease considerably in size by drying, weighing less
than half as much as the fresh roots and becoming wrinkled lengthwise.
The dried root should not be kept too long, as drying diminishes its
medicinal virtues.

=Imports and prices.=—During the fiscal year ended June 30, 1903, the
imports of taraxacum or dandelion root into the United States amounted
to 115,522 pounds. The price per pound ranges from 4 to 6 cents.


                                 DOCKS.
                            _Rumex_ species.

Several species of docks possess medicinal properties. Among these
are the yellow dock (_Rumex crispus_ L.), the broad-leaved dock (_R.
obtusifolius_ L.), and the yellow-rooted water dock (_R. britannica_
L.), all more or less abundant throughout the United States. Other
species are also recognized as possessing value in medicine, but those
above mentioned are the kinds generally collected.


                              Yellow Dock.
                           _Rumex crispus_ L.

=Other common names.=—Curled dock, narrow dock, sour dock. (Fig. 5.)

[Illustration: FIG. 5.—Yellow dock (_Rumex crispus_ L.). First year’s
growth.]

=Range and habitat.=—The species most commonly employed in medicine
is the yellow dock, a perennial introduced from Europe and now found
throughout the United States as a troublesome and very persistent weed
in cultivated as well as waste ground, among rubbish heaps, and along
roadsides.

=Description.=—The deep, spindle-shaped root sends up an erect,
angular, and furrowed stem about 2 to 4 feet high, leafy, branching
near the top, and bearing numerous elongated clusters of inconspicuous
flowers. The leaves are lance-shaped, acute, with the margins strongly
waved and crisped. The lower leaves are obtuse or heart shaped at the
base, from 6 to 8 inches in length, and are borne on long stalks, while
those nearer the top are narrower and shorter, being only 3 to 6 inches
long, on short stems or stemless.

From June to August the yellow dock puts forth, interspersed with
leaves, its many long dense clusters of green, drooping groups of
inconspicuous flowers placed in circles around the stem.


                           Broad-leaved Dock.
                        _Rumex obtusifolius_ L.

=Other common names.=—Bitter dock, common dock, blunt-leaved dock,
butter dock. (Fig. 6.)

[Illustration: FIG. 6.—Broad-leaved dock (_Rumex obtusifolius_ L.).
First year’s growth.]

=Range and habitat.=—The range of this very common weed extends from
the New England States to Oregon and south to Florida and Texas; it
occurs in waste places.

=Description.=—Broad-leaved dock differs from the yellow dock
principally in its more robust habit of growth. It grows to about the
same height, but its stem is stouter, and the leaves, which are wavy
along the margin as in the yellow dock, are much broader and longer.
The lower leaves have long stalks, and are from 6 to 14 inches in
length, with heart-shaped or roundish bases, while the upper ones are
from 2 to 6 inches long and are on short stalks.

[Illustration: FIG. 7.—Leaf, fruiting spike, and root of broad-leaved
dock.]

The green flowers appear from June to August, and are in rather long,
open clusters, the groups rather loose and far apart. In all of the
docks here mentioned, the three inner divisions of the calyx (outer
covering of flower) in fruiting form a kind of triangular nut, like the
grain of buckwheat (to which family, Polygonaceæ, the docks belong),
and one or more of these divisions bear on the back a small granule.
The difference between flower and fruit is barely distinguishable when
seen from a little distance so long as the fruit is immature, both
being green, but later in the season, as the fruit ripens, the spikes
take on a rusty-brown color. (Fig. 7.)


                       Yellow-rooted Water Dock.
                         _Rumex britannica_ L.

=Habitat and range.=—As the common name indicates, this plant frequents
swampy and wet places and banks of streams. It is found from Canada to
New Jersey and Pennsylvania, and westward to Minnesota, Illinois, and
Iowa.

=Description.=—The yellow-rooted water dock is a taller plant than
either of the docks previously mentioned, its stout stem sometimes
reaching a height of 6 feet. The leaves at the base of the plant are
borne on long stalks, and are from 1 to 2 feet in length, but, as with
the other two species, the leaves toward the top of the plant are
shorter, as are also the stalks supporting them. The densely flowered
clusters are not as leafy as in the preceding species mentioned. The
plant flowers from July to August.

[Illustration: FIG. 8.—Yellow dock root.]


                              Dock Roots.

The root, which is the part to be collected for medicinal purposes, is
very similar in all of these species of dock (figs. 7 and 8), usually
from 8 to 12 inches long, fleshy, often somewhat branched, the outside
dark reddish-brown with a rather thick bark, internally yellowish. It
possesses but a very faint odor and a bitter, astringent taste. The
roots should be collected in late summer or autumn after the fruiting
tops have ripened, then washed, split lengthwise into halves or
quarters, and carefully dried.

The docks are largely employed for purifying the blood and as a remedy
in skin diseases.

=Imports and prices.=—Rumex or dock roots are imported into this
country to the extent of about 125,000 pounds annually. The price
ranges from 2 to 8 cents per pound.


                              COUCH GRASS.
         _Agropyron repens_ (L.) Beauv. (_Triticum repens_ L.)

=Other common names.=—Dog-grass, quick-grass, quack-grass,
quitch-grass, scutch-grass, twitch-grass, witch-grass, wheat-grass,
Chandler’s grass, creeping wheat-grass, devil’s-grass, durfa-grass,
Durfee-grass, Dutch-grass, Fin’s grass, quake-grass. (Fig. 9.)

=Range and habitat.=—Couch grass, like so many other pernicious
weeds, was introduced into this country from Europe, and is now a
most troublesome pest in cultivated ground, causing the farmer a
loss of thousands of dollars annually by taking possession of fields
and crowding out valuable crops. It is most abundant from Maine to
Maryland, and westward to Minnesota and Missouri, but is rather
sparingly distributed in the South. It is gaining ground on farms on
the Pacific slope.

[Illustration: FIG. 9.—Couch grass (_Agropyron repens_ (L.) Beauv.).]

=Description.=—This rather coarse grass produces several stems, 1
to 3 feet high, from a long, creeping, jointed rootstock, and bears
densely flowered spike-like heads resembling those of rye or beardless
wheat. The stems are round, smooth, thickened at the joints, and
hollow, bearing from five to seven leaves. These have a long cleft
sheath, and are rough on the upper surface. The heads or spikes are
terminal, solitary, compressed, with two rows of spikelets on a wavy
and flattened axis.

Couch grass is one of the most difficult weeds to eradicate, on
account of the long jointed rootstock, each joint of which is capable
of producing a new plant. Every bit of the rootstock must therefore be
removed from the soil or killed in order to eradicate it.

=Part used.=—The most important part of this grass, not only
agriculturally but also pharmaceutically, is its long, tough rhizome or
rootstock, creeping along underneath the ground and pushing in every
direction. It is pale yellow, smooth, about one-eighth of an inch in
diameter, with joints at intervals of about an inch from which slender
branching rootlets are produced.

One of the best methods of destroying this weed is to plow up the roots
and burn them. They need not be burned, however, but may be saved and
prepared for the drug market. After the rootstocks have been collected
and washed the rootlets should be removed and the rhizome or rootstock
(not the rootlets) cut into short pieces about two-fifths of an inch
long. An ordinary feed-cutting machine may be used for this purpose.
These should then be dried as suggested in the general instructions.

In the drug trade this plant is generally known as dog grass or
triticum. As found in the stores, it is in the form of small, angular
pieces, about one-eighth to one-fourth of an inch long, straw colored,
shining, and hollow. These pieces are odorless but have a somewhat
sweetish taste.

The fluid extract prepared from dog grass is used in kidney and bladder
troubles.

=Imports and prices.=—Couch grass is almost wholly an imported article,
some 250,000 pounds coming into this country annually from Europe. The
price is about 3 to 7 cents per pound.


                               POKEWEED.
          _Phytolacca americana_ L. (_Phytolacca decandra_ L.)

=Other common names.=—Poke, pigeon-berry, garget, scoke, pocan, coakum,
Virginian poke, ink-berry, red-ink-berry, American nightshade, cancer
jalap, redweed. (Fig. 10.)

=Range and habitat.=—Pokeweed is common in rich, moist soil along fence
rows, margins of fields, and in uncultivated land from the New England
States to Minnesota and south to Florida and Texas. It is native in
this country and naturalized in Europe, where it is regarded as an
ornamental garden plant.

=Description.=—The reddish purple stems, rich green foliage, and
clusters of white flowers and dark-purple berries give to this plant a
rather handsome appearance. Pokeweed attains a height of from 3 to 9
feet from a very large perennial root. It is erect, branched, the stems
stout, smooth, green at first, then reddish. On examining a piece of
the stem, the pith will be seen to be divided into disk-shaped pieces,
with hollow spaces between them. The leaves are ovate or ovate-oblong,
acute at the apex, smooth, about 5 inches long and 2 to 3 inches wide,
on short stems. The margins are without indentation. About July to
September the long clusters of whitish flowers are produced, followed
by the green berries, which upon ripening become a rich dark-purple
color. The flower clusters are from 3 to 4 inches in length and on long
stalks, the flowers numerous and borne on reddish stems. The berries
are globular, flattened both at top and bottom, smooth and shining, and
contain ten black seeds imbedded in a rich crimson juice. (Fig. 11.)

[Illustration: FIG. 10.—Pokeweed (_Phytolacca americana_ L.).]

=Parts used.=—For medicinal purposes the berries and roots are
employed. Both of these should be collected when the berries are fully
mature, which usually occurs about two months after flowering. The
clusters of berries should be carefully dried in the shade. They are
poisonous, have no odor, a sweetish taste at first, then acrid.

[Illustration: FIG. 11.—Pokeweed, flowering and fruiting branch.]

[Illustration: FIG. 12.—Pokeroot.]

Pokeweed has a very large, fleshy, and poisonous root, conical in shape
and branched. (Fig. 12.) It should be gathered in the latter part of
the fall, thoroughly cleaned, cut into transverse slices, and carefully
dried. When dry it has a grayish, wrinkled appearance, breaks with a
fibrous fracture, and the slices show many concentric rings. There is a
slight odor and the taste is sweetish and acrid.

Both the berries and roots are alterative, act upon the bowels and
cause vomiting, and preparations made from them are used in treating
various diseases of the skin and blood, and in certain cases in
relieving pain and allaying inflammation.

=Price.=—Phytolacca or pokeroot brings from 2 to 5 cents per pound, and
the dry berries about 5 cents per pound.


                               FOXGLOVE.
                        _Digitalis purpurea_ L.

=Other common names.=—Purple foxglove, thimbles, fairy cap, fairy
fingers, fairy thimbles, fairy bells, dog’s finger, finger flower,
lady’s glove, ladyfingers, lady’s thimble, popdock, flapdock, flopdock,
lion’s mouth, rabbit’s flower, cottagers, throatwort, Scotch mercury.
(Fig. 13.)

[Illustration: FIG. 13.—Foxglove (_Digitalis purpurea_ L.).]

=Range and habitat.=—Foxglove was originally introduced into this
country from Europe as an ornamental garden plant, but has now escaped
from cultivation in a few localities and is assuming the character
of a weed. This is the case in parts of Oregon, Washington, and West
Virginia, where the plant is found in great abundance in dry, sandy
soil, along roads and fence rows, on the borders of timber land, and in
small cleared places.

=Description.=—This is a very handsome plant of the figwort family
(Scrophulariaceæ), biennial, and the first year forms only a rosette
of dense leaves, but in the second year of its growth the simple erect
flowering stalk is produced, attaining a height of from 3 to 4 feet.
This is round, indistinctly angled toward the top, leafy and downy. The
leaves are oblong-ovate, narrowed at the base into long winged stalks;
the upper surface of the leaves is dull-green and wrinkled, while the
under side is grayish, with short, soft hairs and a thick network of
prominent veins. The root leaves are rather large and are borne on long
stalks, but as the leaves approach the top of the plant they become
smaller and the leafstalks shorter.

The plant is in flower about June, and the long clusters of numerous
tubular bell-shaped flowers are very showy. The clusters are terminal,
and about 14 inches in length. The flowers are large, about 2 inches
long, the color ranging from white through lavender to purple, the
inside of the lower lobe bearing long, soft, white hairs and crimson
spots on a white ground.

=Part used.=—Leaves of the second year’s growth only are employed, and
these should be collected when about two-thirds of the flowers have
expanded. They should be very carefully dried in the shade and then
kept in closed boxes or barrels so as to keep out all moisture. The
greatest care is necessary in curing, as the leaves soon lose their
medicinal properties if not properly dried.

Preparations made from foxglove are of great value in heart troubles,
but they are poisonous and should never be used except on the advice of
a physician.

=Imports and prices.=—From 40,000 to 60,000 pounds of digitalis or
foxglove are annually imported into this country from Europe, where the
plant is cultivated. The American-grown product has so far never been
used, but leaves from the wild American plant have been assayed and
found to be equally as good as the European article.

The price per pound ranges from about 6 to 8 cents.


                                MULLEIN.
                         _Verbascum thapsus_ L.

=Other common names.=—Great mullein, velvet or mullein dock, Aaron’s
rod, Adam’s flannel, blanket leaf, bullock’s lungwort, cow’s or clown’s
lungwort, candlewick, feltwort, flannel leaf, old-man’s flannel, hare’s
beard, hedge taper, ice leaf, Jacob’s staff, Jupiter’s staff, lady’s
foxglove, Peter’s staff, shepherd’s club, torches, torchwort, velvet
plant. (Fig. 14.)

=Range and habitat.=—Mullein is a native of Europe, and occurs in this
country as a troublesome weed in fields and pastures, waste places,
and along roadsides from Maine to Minnesota and southward, and it is
also spreading in the far Western States. It produces great quantities
of seed, and, if allowed to persist, will soon stock the ground with
seeds which may retain their vitality and germinate at intervals for a
number of years.

[Illustration: FIG. 14.—Mullein (_Verbascum thapsus_ L.).]

=Description.=—Mullein can be easily recognized by its tall, erect
habit of growth, the white-woolly or felty appearance of the entire
plant, and its spike of golden-yellow flowers. It is a biennial
belonging to the figwort family (Scrophulariaceæ).

This plant has a stout, straight stem, which sometimes grows as tall
as 7 feet. The stem and also the leaves are densely hairy, the latter
alternate, sessile (stemless), their margins extending in wings along
down the stem. The rather thick, rough leaves are from 4 to 12 inches
in length, oblong, acute, and densely hairy above and below.

In the first year of its growth only a rosette of downy leaves is
produced, but during the second year the flower stalk with its densely
flowered spike appears. The golden-yellow flowers are produced from
June to August.

=Parts used.=—As the leaves and flowers are to be collected at the
time when the plant is in bloom, the propagation of the plant by the
dissemination of its seed is prevented. The leaves are cured in the
usual manner. They are practically inodorous, and have a somewhat
bitter, mucilaginous taste.

It is very desirable to have the flowers retain their bright yellow
color: they must therefore be thoroughly dried, and then kept free from
moisture in well-stoppered bottles. They readily absorb moisture and
if allowed to become damp will turn black. The corolla (petals), with
the adhering stamens only, is dried, the calyx being rejected. Mullein
flowers have a sweetish, pleasant odor.

Mullein is used in coughs and catarrh, to quiet nervous irritation,
and to relieve pain and inflammation. According to some authors the
dried leaves are often smoked like tobacco to relieve nasal catarrh and
throat affections.

=Imports and prices.=—About 5,000 pounds of verbascum or mullein
flowers are annually imported, chiefly from Germany, in which country
this plant is cultivated. The leaves are also imported to a small
extent.

The price paid for the leaves ranges from 2½ to 5 cents per pound, and
that for the flowers may range from 25 to 75 cents per pound.


                                LOBELIA.
                          _Lobelia inflata_ L.

[Illustration: FIG. 15.—Lobelia (_Lobelia inflata_ L.).]

=Other common names.=—Indian tobacco, wild tobacco, bladder pod, asthma
weed, gagroot, pukeweed, vomitwort, low belia, eyebright. (Fig. 15.)

=Range and habitat.=—This poisonous weed occurs nearly everywhere
throughout the United States, being most plentiful east of the
Mississippi River, and thriving in dry, clayey, or siliceous soil in
sunny situations along roadsides, and in old fields and pastures.

=Description.=—The erect leafy stem of this annual herbaceous plant
is from 1 to 3 feet high, from a fibrous root. It is simple and
rough-hairy below, smooth above, and bears a few short branches.
The entire plant contains an acrid milky juice. It belongs to the
bellflower family (Campanulaceæ).

The pale-green leaves are alternate, from 1 to 2½ inches long,
gradually diminishing in size as they reach the summit of the plant,
the lower leaves being borne on stalks, while the upper ones are
stemless. They are thin, oblong or oval, blunt, irregularly toothed,
and almost wavy, with short hairs on both surfaces.

From July until frost the rather inconspicuous, very small pale-blue
flowers appear. These are very numerous, each one borne in the axils
of the upper leaves on very short stems, all together forming a long,
spike-like head. The lower lip of the flower has three lobes, the upper
one two segments, and from the center of the latter the tube of the
flower is cleft to the base. The seed pods are in the form of inflated
capsules, nearly globular, striated (grooved or marked with parallel
lines), and contain very numerous minute dark-brown seeds.

=Parts used.=—The leaves and flowering tops are used in medicine, and
there is also a good demand for the seed. The leaves and tops should be
gathered after some of the pods have become inflated, should be dried
in the shade, and when dry kept in covered vessels. The dried leaves
and tops have a rather disagreeable, somewhat sickening odor, and the
taste, though mild at first, soon becomes strongly acrid and nauseous.
The seeds are extremely minute, and each capsule is said to contain
from 450 to 500 seeds.

Lobelia is an expectorant, acts upon the nervous system and bowels,
causes vomiting, and is poisonous.

=Price.=—The price paid for the dried leaves and tops ranges from 3 to
8 cents per pound, and that for the seed from 15 to 20 cents per pound.


                                 TANSY.
                         _Tanacetum vulgare_ L.

=Other common names.=—Bitter buttons, ginger plant, parsley fern,
scented fern. (Fig. 16.)

=Range and habitat.=—Tansy was originally introduced into this country
as a garden plant from Europe, where it is native. It has now escaped
from cultivation and is found as a weed along waysides and fences
in many places from New England to Minnesota and southward to North
Carolina and Missouri.

=Description.=—This strong-scented perennial herb belongs to the aster
family (Asteraceæ). The stout, erect stem is from 1½ to 3 feet high,
branching near the top, somewhat reddish, and usually smooth. The
general outline of the leaf is oval, and it is divided nearly to the
midrib into about seven pairs of segments, which, like the terminal
one, are again divided for about two-thirds of the distance to the
midvein into smaller lobes having saw-toothed margins. The entire leaf
is about 6 inches in length.

Tansy is in flower from July to September, and the roundish but
flat-topped yellow flower heads are produced in dense terminal clusters.

=Parts used.=—At the time of flowering the leaves and tops are
collected for medicinal purposes and are dried in the usual manner. The
odor of tansy is strongly aromatic and the taste bitter. In drying,
tansy loses about four-fifths of its weight.

Tansy is employed in derangements of women, and has stimulant and tonic
properties. It is also used for expelling worms. This drug is poisonous
and has been known to produce fatal results.

[Illustration: FIG. 16.—Tansy (_Tanacetum vulgare_ L.).]

[Illustration: FIG. 17.—Gum plant (_Grindelia robusta_ Nutt.).]

=Imports and prices.=—About 30,000 pounds of tanacetum or tansy are
imported annually. The price paid per pound ranges from 3 to 6 cents.


                               GUM PLANT.
                       _Grindelia robusta_ Nutt.

=Range.=—The gum plant (fig. 17) occurs in the States west of the Rocky
Mountains.

=Description.=—The entire plant is covered with a resinous substance,
which gives it a gummy, varnished appearance, whence its common name,
gum plant, is derived.

This perennial of the aster family of plants has an erect habit of
growth, and sends up a round, smooth stem about a foot and a half
high, narrowly grooved and freely branching near the top, each branch
terminating in a large yellow flower. The branches near the flower
heads have a slightly reddish appearance.

The pale-green leaves are about an inch long, of a leathery texture,
rather rigid, coated with resin, and show numerous translucent dots.
The leaves are oblong-spatulate (having a gradually narrowed base below
the broader rounded summit) and are more or less clasping at the base,
the lower ones somewhat saw-toothed.

The yellow flowers are borne singly at the ends of the branches and
measure about three-quarters of an inch across. The involucre (set
of small leaves immediately beneath the flower) is very resinous and
consists of numerous thick, overlapping scales, the tips of which are
rolled forward.

=Parts used and prices.=—The flowering tops and leaves of this and of
the scaly grindelia are collected indiscriminately, and bring from 5 to
12 cents per pound.

They are used in asthma and similar affections, and externally in cases
of poisoning by poison ivy.


                            SCALY GRINDELIA.
                  _Grindelia squarrosa_ (Pursh) Dunal.

[Illustration: FIG. 18.—Scaly grindelia (_Grindelia squarrosa_ (Pursh)
Dunal).]

=Range.=—Scaly grindelia (fig. 18) has a wider distribution than the
gum plant, being quite common on the plains and prairies from the
Saskatchewan to Minnesota, south to Texas and Mexico, and westward to
California.

=Description.=—This species is very similar to the gum plant, with the
exception that it is smaller and does not have the gummy appearance
of the former. The slender, erect stems are from 1 to 2 feet high and
somewhat sparingly branched near the top. The branches near the flower
heads appear to be somewhat more reddish than in the species previously
mentioned. In this species, also, the leaves are not borne on stalks,
but are somewhat clasping at the base, and they are longer (about
2 inches long), not rigid, thinner, and more prominently toothed.
The flowers are also very similar to those of the gum plant, but are
smaller, the scales narrower, and the recurved tips longer and more
slender.

=Parts used.=—The leaves and flowering tops are collected with those of
the gum plant, _Grindelia robusta_.


                                BONESET.
                      _Eupatorium perfoliatum_ L.

[Illustration: FIG. 19.—Boneset (_Eupatorium perfoliatum_ L.).]

=Other common names.=—Thoroughwort, crosswort, wood boneset, teasel,
ague-weed, feverwort, thorough-stem or thorough-wax, vegetable
antimony, sweating plant, Indian sage, wild sage, tearal, wild Isaac.
(Fig. 19.)

=Range and habitat.=—Boneset delights in moist situations, and is
common as a weed in clayey or sandy soil, in low, wet ground, and along
streams, on the edges of swamps and in thickets from the New England
States west to Nebraska and south to Texas and Florida.

=Description.=—One of the features which will aid in recognizing this
plant is the peculiar arrangement of the leaves. These are opposite
each other and joined together at the base around the stem, and
therefore have the appearance of a single leaf with the stem passing
through the center of it.

Boneset is a perennial herb of the aster family of plants (Asteraceæ),
with stout, rough, hairy stems 1 to 5 feet high, from a horizontal,
crooked root. The leaves are opposite, united at the base, lance
shaped, tapering to a point, bluntly toothed, rough with prominent
veins, wrinkled, dark green on the upper surface, downy and paler green
on the lower surface. Both leaves together measure from 8 to 14 inches
from point to point and 1 to 1½ inches wide. The flowers are white,
tubular, ten to twenty or more united in dense heads, and the heads are
borne in rather crowded flat-topped clusters, appearing from July to
September.

=Parts used.=—The leaves and flowering tops are the parts used in
medicine, and these should be collected when the plants are in
flower, stripped from the stalk, and carefully dried. They lose about
three-fourths of their weight in drying. The odor is faintly aromatic,
the taste bitter and astringent.

As indicated by the common names “ague-weed” and “feverwort,” this is a
popular remedy in fever and ague. It is used also in colds, dyspepsia,
jaundice, and for toning up the system. In large doses it is an emetic
and cathartic.

=Prices.=—Eupatorium or boneset leaves and tops bring from 2 to 8 cents
per pound.


                                CATNIP.
                          _Nepeta cataria_ L.

=Other common names.=—Catmint, catrup, cat’s wort, field mint. (Fig.
20.)

=Range and habitat.=—This very common weed is naturalized from Europe,
and is found in rather dry soil in waste places and cultivated land,
about old buildings and along fences, from Canada to Minnesota and
southward to Virginia and Arkansas.

=Description.=—The erect, square stems of this perennial herb of the
mint family (Menthaceæ) grow to a height of 2 to 3 feet, are branched,
and somewhat whitish in appearance from the covering of fine white
hairs.

[Illustration: FIG. 20.—Catnip (_Nepeta cataria_ L.)]

The leaves are opposite and borne on stems, heart shaped or oblong,
with an acute apex, 1 to 2½ inches long, evenly and finely scalloped,
green above, beneath grayish-green with fine white hairs. The
many-flowered clusters appear from June to September, and are borne in
thick spikes 1 to 5 inches long at the top of the stems and branches.
The flowers are white or somewhat purple, two-lipped, the upper lip
two-cleft, the lower one three-lobed and sometimes spotted with red,
the middle lobe broadest and round-toothed.

=Parts used.=—The flowering tops and leaves are to be collected
when the plant is in flower and carefully dried. They have a strong
mint-like odor and a bitter taste. The coarser stems and branches
should be rejected.

Catnip is used in derangements of women, as a mild stimulant and tonic,
and has a quieting effect on the nervous system.

=Imports and prices.=—Cataria or catnip is imported in but small
quantities. The price paid for the flowering tops and leaves is from 2
to 8 cents per pound.


                               HOARHOUND.
                         _Marrubium vulgare_ L.

=Other common names.=—Houndsbene, marvel, marrube. (Fig. 21.)

=Range and habitat.=—Hoarhound has been naturalized from Europe, and
has escaped from gardens in this country, being found now rather
abundantly in dry sandy or stony soil in waste places, pastures,
fields, along roadsides, and near dwellings, from Maine to South
Carolina, Texas, and westward to California and Oregon. It is very
abundant in pastures in California, Oregon, and in limited areas in
Indiana, Missouri, Ohio, and Michigan. In southern California this
plant has proved a most troublesome weed, occurring almost everywhere
and growing in such dense masses as to crowd out all other vegetation.
It has spread rapidly over thousands of acres, taking complete
possession of the land and destroying pastures.

=Description.=—The entire plant has a whitish, woolly appearance,
caused by the dense covering of hairs. It is a perennial plant, and as
will be seen from the characteristic lip-shaped flowers, is a member
of the mint family (Menthaceæ). The whole plant has a rather pleasant,
balsamic odor.

[Illustration: FIG. 21.—Hoarhound (_Marrubium vulgare_ L.).]

Hoarhound is a bushy, branching herb, with fibrous roots sending
up numerous woolly stems about 1 to 3 feet high, rounded below and
four-angled above. The leaves are opposite each other, 1 to 2 inches
long, oval or nearly round, wrinkled, somewhat blunt at the apex,
narrowed or somewhat heart shaped at the base, with rounded teeth,
somewhat hairy and wrinkled on the upper surface, and prominently
veined and very hoary on the lower surface. The flowers are whitish,
two-lipped, the upper lip two-lobed, the lower three-lobed, and are
borne in dense, woolly clusters in the axils of the leaves. (Fig. 22.)
The plant flowers from June to September, and the characteristic hooked
calyx teeth of the mature flower clusters cling to the wool of sheep
like a bur, resulting in the scattering of the seeds.

=Parts used.=—The leaves and tops are used in medicine. These should
be gathered just before the herb is in flower, rejecting the coarse
stalks, and should be dried in the shade in the usual manner. The
balsamic odor diminishes in drying. The herb has a bitter, persistent
taste.

[Illustration: FIG. 22.—Hoarhound, flowering top.]

Hoarhound is well known as a remedy for colds, and is also used in
dyspepsia and for expelling worms.

=Imports and prices.=—A considerable quantity of marrubium or hoarhound
is imported, about 125,000 pounds coming into this country annually.
Three to 8 cents is the price paid per pound.


                            BLESSED THISTLE.
                         _Cnicus benedictus_ L.

=Other common names.=—Holy thistle, bitter thistle, Our Lady’s thistle,
St. Benedict’s thistle, cursed thistle, spotted thistle. (Fig. 23.)

=Range and habitat.=—This weed has been introduced from Europe and
occurs in stony, uncultivated localities and waste places in the
Southern States and in California and Utah.

[Illustration: FIG. 23.—Blessed thistle (_Cnicus benedictus_ L.).]

=Description.=—Blessed thistle is an annual plant belonging to the
aster family (Asteraceæ). The round stems are erect, about 1 to 2 feet
high, branched, and rather woolly. The leaves are more or less hairy,
the lower ones borne on petioles (leaf stems), the upper ones sessile
(stemless) and clasping the stem. They are oblong-lanceolate and
wavy-lobed. The terminal yellow flower heads are surrounded by scales
of a leathery texture, which are prolonged into long, hard, branching
spines.

=Parts used.=—The leaves and tops should be collected when the plant
is in flower, about June, thoroughly and quickly dried, and kept in a
vessel from which moisture, light, and air should be excluded. They
have a somewhat disagreeable odor and the taste is very bitter.

Blessed thistle is employed in fevers, dyspepsia, and as a tonic to
restore the appetite.

=Imports and prices.=—This plant is cultivated in Germany, from which
country it is imported to a limited extent. The price per pound ranges
from 8 to 10 cents.


                                YARROW.
                       _Achillea millefolium_ L.

[Illustration: FIG. 24.—Yarrow (_Achillea millefolium_ L.).]

=Other common names.=—Milfoil, thousand leaf, thousand-leaved clover,
green arrow, gordoloba, nosebleed, bloodwort, carpenter’s grass,
sanguinary, soldiers’ woundwort, old man’s pepper. (Fig. 24.)

=Range and habitat.=—This herb is a common weed from the New England
States to Missouri and in scattered localities in other parts of the
country, occurring along roadsides, in old fields, pastures, and
meadows.

=Description.=—Yarrow is a perennial belonging to the aster family
(Asteraceæ). It is about 10 to 20 inches in height, its numerous
dark-green feathery leaves divided into very fine crowded parts.
The flowers are produced in abundance from June to September. These
are small, white (sometimes rose-colored), and are crowded in dense
flat-topped heads.

The odor of yarrow is strong and aromatic, very similar to that of
chamomile, and the taste is sharp and bitter. When this plant is eaten
by cows its bitter taste and strong odor are imparted to dairy products.

=Parts used.=—The entire plant is collected when in flower, and is
carefully dried. The coarser stems should be rejected. The plant loses
nearly four-fifths of its weight in drying.

Yarrow is a stimulant tonic, acts upon the bladder, and checks
excessive discharges.

=Imports and prices.=—This is an imported article, though not brought
into the United States in large quantities. The price of achillea or
yarrow ranges from 2 to 5 cents per pound.


                            CANADA FLEABANE.
     _Leptilon canadense_ (L.) Britton. (_Erigeron canadensis_ L.)

=Other common names.=—Horseweed, colt’s tail, scabious, prideweed,
butter weed, fireweed, blood-stanch, cow’s tail, bitter weed. (Fig. 25.)

[Illustration: FIG. 25.—Canada fleabane (_Leptilon canadense_ (L.)
Britton).]

=Range and habitat.=—This weed is common in damp, sandy soils in fields
and waste places and along roadsides in many parts of the United
States, especially throughout the northern Mississippi Valley.

=Description.=—Canada fleabane is an annual weed belonging to the aster
family (Asteraceæ). The stem, which is bristly-hairy, or sometimes
smooth, varies greatly in height, according to the soil, being
sometimes only 3 inches high, and in favorable soil often reaching a
height of 10 feet. The larger plants are branched near the top. The
leaves are usually somewhat hairy, those scattered along the stem being
rather narrow, with unbroken margins, and the lower ones slightly
toothed. From June to November numerous heads of small inconspicuous
white flowers are produced, followed by an abundance of seed.

=Parts used.=—The entire herb is medicinal, and should be gathered
during the flowering period and carefully dried. It has a faint,
agreeable odor and a somewhat astringent and bitter taste. The fresh
herb on distillation yields a volatile oil which is sold as oil of
fleabane.

The common name “blood stanch” indicates the use of this plant for
arresting hemorrhages from various sources and the bleeding of wounds.
It is useful also in diarrhea and dropsy.

=Price.=—The price paid for erigeron or flea bane ranges from 6 to 8
cents per pound.


                              JIMSON WEED.
                         _Datura stramonium_ L.

=Other common names.=—Jamestown weed (from which “jimson” weed is
derived), thorn-apple, stinkweed, stinkwort, devil’s apple, mad-apple,
devil’s trumpet, fireweed, Jamestown lily, dewtry, apple of Peru. (Fig.
26).

[Illustration: FIG. 26.—Jimson weed (_Datura stramonium_ L.).]

=Range and habitat.=—Jimson weed is exceedingly common in fields and
waste places throughout the entire country with the exception of the
North and West. It is native in the Tropics and widely scattered in
nearly all warm countries.

=Description.=—This well-known rank and ill-scented poisonous weed
is an annual about 2 to 5 feet in height, and belongs to the potato
family (Solanaceæ). Its yellowish-green stems are stout, leafy, and
much forked. The leaves are large, 3 to 8 inches long, thin, smooth,
pointed at the apex and usually narrowed at the base, irregularly
waved and toothed, veiny, dark green on the upper surface and paler
green beneath. The rather large, showy flowers are produced from May
to September. They are white, funnel shaped, about 3 inches long, and
have a heavy odor. The seed pod is a dry, oval, prickly capsule, which,
when quite ripe, bursts open and discloses four valves, containing
numerous black, kidney-shaped seeds. (Fig. 27.) The seeds are
ill-smelling when fresh, as is the entire plant. They are dull black,
about one-sixth of an inch long, flattened, wrinkled, and marked with
small depressions.

=Parts used.=—Both the leaves and seeds are medicinal. The leaves
are collected at the time of flowering, the entire plant being cut
or pulled up and the leaves stripped and dried in the shade. The
unpleasant narcotic odor diminishes upon drying. The leaves are
poisonous, cause dilation of the pupil of the eye, and are used
principally in asthma.

For the collection of the seeds the capsules should be taken from
the plants when they are quite ripe, but still of a green color. The
capsules should then be dried for a few days, when they will burst open
and the seeds can be readily shaken out. These should now be carefully
dried. The seeds like the leaves are poisonous and possess the same
properties.

Occasional cases of poisoning of children occur from eating the seeds
of jimson weed and taking the flowers in their mouths.

=Imports and prices.=—From 100,000 to 150,000 pounds of stramonium
leaves (the name by which they are designated in the drug trade) are
imported into this country annually, and about 10,000 pounds of seeds
are imported.

The leaves will bring from 2½ to 8 cents per pound, and stramonium
seeds from 3 to 7 cents per pound.

[Illustration: FIG. 27.—Leaves, flower, and capsules of jimson weed.]


                          Purple thorn-apple.

The purple thorn-apple, technically known as _Datura tatula_, is very
similar to the jimson weed, possesses the same properties, and is
distinguished from it merely by its reddish stems and purplish flowers.
The leaves and seeds may be gathered with those of the jimson weed.


                            POISON HEMLOCK.
                         _Conium maculatum_ L.

=Other common names.=—Spotted parsley, St. Bennet’s herb, bad-man’s
oatmeal, heck-how, wode whistle, cashes, bunk, poison parsley, spotted
cowbane. (Fig. 28.)

=Range and habitat.=—Poison hemlock is rather common in waste places
and along roadsides, principally in the Eastern and Middle States. It
has been naturalized in this country from Europe.

=Description.=—From the close resemblance of the leaves of this plant
to parsley, it is sometimes mistaken for the latter and fatal cases
of poisoning have occurred. All parts of the plant are exceedingly
poisonous.

[Illustration: FIG. 28.—Poison hemlock (_Conium maculatum_ L.).]

Poison hemlock belongs to the same family as the parsley, namely, the
Apiaceæ. It is a biennial, about 2 to 6 feet in height, with a smooth,
hollow stem dotted with purple, and large leaves very much like those
of parsley. The numerous small white flowers are borne in rather showy
umbels (flat-topped clusters, with stems from one point) and appear
in June and July. The fruit ripens in August and September. The fruit
is grayish-green, ribbed, about one-eighth of an inch long, ovate,
laterally flattened, and smooth.

The entire plant possesses a disagreeable mousy odor, which is
especially noticeable when bruised.

=Parts used.=—The fruit and leaves are the parts used. The fruit should
be collected while still green but full grown, which in most localities
is some time in August. It should be dried in dark but well ventilated
places, and then stored in tight cans or boxes where it will not be
exposed to the action of light and air.

The poison hemlock leaves should be collected when the plant is in
flower, which will be in the second year of its growth. The stems
should be rejected. Contrary to the usual method of drying leaves and
herbs, the poison hemlock leaves may be quickly dried in the sun and
then kept in tightly closed vessels. The leaves will retain their green
color if properly cured. The odor is still very disagreeable, but not
so pronounced as in the fresh plant.

This very poisonous drug is used in rheumatism, neuralgia, asthma, and
in cases where the nervous system is in an excited condition.

=Imports and prices.=—The imports of conium or poison hemlock seed
amount to about 20,000 pounds annually, and from 10,000 to 20,000
pounds of the leaves are imported. The price paid for the seed is about
3 cents per pound, and for the leaves about 4 cents.


                           AMERICAN WORMSEED.
                     _Chenopodium ambrosioides_ L.

=Other common names.=—Mexican tea, Spanish tea, Jerusalem tea, Jesuit
tea, ambrosia. (Fig. 29.)

[Illustration: FIG. 29.—American wormseed (_Chenopodium ambrosioides_
L.).]

=Range and habitat.=—This strong-scented herb, naturalized in this
country from tropical America, frequents waste places around dwellings
and is found in streets, meadows, pastures, and grain fields from New
England to Florida, and westward to California.

=Description.=—American wormseed is an annual plant of the goosefoot
family (Chenopodiaceæ), attaining a height of from 2 to 3 feet. The
stem is grooved, usually much branched and leafy, the leaves oblong or
oblong lance-shaped, somewhat acute at the apex, the lower ones 1 to 3
inches long and wavy-toothed, the numerous upper leaves much smaller
and usually entire. From July to September the flowers are produced,
followed throughout the autumn by the fruits, both of which are green
and borne in crowded leafy spikes. The whole plant has a powerful,
disagreeable odor, due to the essential oil which it contains.

=Part used.=—The entire leafy part of the plant is sometimes employed
for the distillation of the oil, although the fruit alone is listed in
the Pharmacopœia of the United States. The fruit is distilled for the
oil, which it contains in large quantities.

The fruits are in the form of small grains, about the size of a pin
head, globular but slightly flattened, greenish, and inclosing the
small shining black seeds. They have the same powerful odor as the
plant, which does not diminish when the fruit is dried, and the taste
is bitter and pungent. American wormseed is an anthelmintic, that is,
it has the property of expelling worms.

The fruits of _Chenopodium anthelminticum_, another species of
wormseed, are collected with those of the species just described. This
plant is very similar to the American wormseed, the fruits being alike,
and the only differences being that in _Chenopodium anthelminticum_
the stem is slightly taller, from 2½ to 3½ feet high, the leaves are
more coarsely toothed, the flowers are borne in more elongated, usually
leafless spikes, the odor is more pronounced and disagreeable, and the
range and distribution of the plant are more limited.

Wormseed is cultivated to a considerable extent in parts of Maryland,
where the distillation of the plant for the oil is carried on.

=Price.=—In ordinary seasons the price paid for chenopodium or wormseed
ranges from 6 to 8 cents per pound. The oil distilled from wormseed is
at present selling at $1.50 per pound.


                             BLACK MUSTARD.
            _Brassica nigra_ (L.) Koch. (_Sinapis nigra_ L.)

=Other common names.=—Brown mustard, red mustard. (Fig. 30.)

[Illustration: FIG. 30.—Black mustard (_Brassica nigra_ (L.) Koch).]

=Range and habitat.=—Black mustard, introduced from Europe, is a
troublesome weed in many parts of the United States. It is common in
almost every State in the Union along roadsides, in cultivated ground,
and in waste places, being especially troublesome in grain fields and
pastures. Both black and white mustards are cultivated in California.

This plant is a great pest in southern California, covering thousands
of acres and forming dense, impenetrable thickets over 6 feet in
height, in which birds have their nesting places, and, by eating and
excreting the seeds, help to spread this pernicious weed.

=Description.=—The rather stiff, dark-green, branching stem of black
mustard is from 4 to 6 feet in height. The lower part of the stems and
branches is more or less bristly hairy, but the upper part is usually
smooth.

The leaves are dark green, somewhat rough, with bristly hairs, and
are all borne on stalks. The lower leaves are lobed, the terminal
lobe being the largest and the two or more lateral ones smaller. The
leaves toward the top of the plant become lance shaped and are slightly
toothed.

The flowers of black mustard appear from June to September, and are
of a bright yellow color. They are rather small, scarcely a quarter
of an inch in diameter, the four petals spreading and each consisting
of a rounded blade with a narrow claw. The petals alternate with the
pale-green sepals or calyx lobes. The flowers appear in clusters at the
ends of the elongating stems, followed from July to November by the
numerous erect pods crowded against the stem in dense narrow clusters.
The pods are about 1 inch in length, quadrangular, smooth, and tipped
at the apex by the short, persistent style. The seeds contained in the
pods are very numerous, small, about one twenty-fifth of an inch in
diameter, globular, blackish brown, and finely pitted.

The plant is an annual, and if care is taken to prevent the
distribution of the seeds it is not difficult to exterminate. The seeds
possess great vitality, and may remain in the ground for years before
germinating.

=Collection of seeds.=—The tops may be pulled when most of the pods are
nearly mature, but before they are ready to spring open. They should
then be placed on a clean, dry floor or shelf, allowing the pods to
ripen and dry out, when they will burst open and the seeds can be
readily shaken out.

Mustard seed has no odor whatever when collected, not even when it is
powdered in its dry state, but as soon as water is added in grinding
it, the powerful, penetrating mustard odor is developed. The taste is
sharp and pungent.


                             WHITE MUSTARD.
                           _Sinapis alba_ L.

=Another common name.=—Yellow mustard. (Fig. 31.)

[Illustration: FIG. 31.—White mustard (_Sinapis alba_ L.).]

=Range and habitat.=—White mustard is a weed found in cultivated land
along waysides and fence rows, but is not so abundant nor so widely
distributed as the black mustard. It is naturalized in this country
from Europe.

=Description.=—This plant is very similar to black mustard, but is
smaller (growing only about 1 to 2 feet tall), bright green, but the
flowers and seeds are much larger, and the rough-hairy pods with their
long, sickle-shaped beaks are spreading instead of being pressed
against the stem. The flowers are paler yellow than those of the
fore-going species. The divisions of the leaves reach to the midrib,
the leaves are rough-hairy, and the pods bristly. The seeds are pale
yellow and smooth.

=Collection and uses of seeds.=—The seeds are to be collected in the
same manner as those of black mustard. White mustard seed has no odor
in its entire state, and when water is added in grinding it the odor
does not become so pronounced as in the case of black mustard, neither
is the taste so pungent.

In medicine mustard seeds are used principally in the preparation of
plasters and poultices. They are used also in dyspepsia, and in large
doses act as an emetic.

=Imports and prices.=—The imports into the United States of black and
white mustard together during the fiscal year ended June 30, 1903,
amounted to 5,302,876 pounds. The price ranges from 3 to 6 cents per
pound for both the black and white mustard seeds.




                          FARMERS’ BULLETINS.


The following is a list of the Farmers’ Bulletins available for
distribution, showing the number, title, and size in pages of each.
Copies will be sent to any address on application to any Senator,
Representative, or Delegate in Congress, or to the Secretary of
Agriculture, Washington, D. C. The missing numbers have been
discontinued, being superseded by later bulletins.

  16. Leguminous Plants. Pp. 24.
  21. Barnyard Manure. Pp. 32.
  22. Feeding of Farm Animals. Pp. 32.
  24. Hog Cholera and Swine Plague. Pp. 16.
  25. Peanuts: Culture and Uses. Pp. 24.
  27. Flax for Seed and Fiber. Pp. 16.
  28. Weeds: And How to Kill Them. Pp. 32.
  29. Souring and Other Changes in Milk. Pp. 23.
  30. Grape Diseases on the Pacific Coast. Pp. 15.
  31. Alfalfa, or Lucern. Pp. 24.
  32. Silos and Silage. Pp. 32.
  33. Peach Growing for Market. Pp. 24.
  34. Meats: Composition and Cooking. Pp. 29.
  35. Potato Culture. Pp. 24.
  36. Cotton Seed and Its Products. Pp. 16.
  37. Kafir Corn: Culture and Uses. Pp. 12.
  38. Spraying for Fruit Diseases. Pp. 12.
  39. Onion Culture. Pp. 31.
  42. Facts About Milk. Pp. 29.
  43. Sewage Disposal on the Farm. Pp. 20.
  44. Commercial Fertilizers. Pp. 24.
  45. Insects Injurious to Stored Grain. Pp. 24.
  46. Irrigation in the Humid Climates. Pp. 27.
  47. Insects Affecting the Cotton Plant. Pp. 32.
  48. The Manuring of Cotton. Pp. 16.
  49. Sheep Feeding. Pp. 21.
  50. Sorghum as a Forage Crop. Pp. 20.
  51. Standard Varieties of Chickens. Pp. 48.
  52. The Sugar Beet. Pp. 48.
  53. How to Grow Mushrooms. Pp. 20.
  54. Some Common Birds. Pp. 40.
  55. The Dairy Herd. Pp. 24.
  56. Experiment Station Work—I. Pp. 31.
  57. Butter Making on the Farm. Pp. 16.
  58. The Soy Bean as Forage Crop. Pp. 24.
  59. Bee Keeping. Pp. 32.
  60. Methods of Curing Tobacco. Pp. 16.
  61. Asparagus Culture. Pp. 40.
  62. Marketing Farm Produce. Pp. 28.
  63. Care of Milk on the Farm. Pp. 40.
  64. Ducks and Geese. Pp. 48.
  65. Experiment Station Work—II. Pp. 32.
  66. Meadows and Pastures. Pp. 28.
  68. The Black Rot of the Cabbage. Pp. 22.
  69. Experiment Station Work—III. Pp. 32.
  70. Insect Enemies of the Grape. Pp. 23.
  71. Essentials in Beef Production. Pp. 24.
  72. Cattle Ranges of the Southwest. Pp. 32.
  73. Experiment Station Work—IV. Pp. 32.
  74. Milk as Food. Pp. 39.
  75. The Grain Smuts. Pp. 20.
  76. Tomato Growing. Pp. 30.
  77. The Liming of Soils. Pp. 19.
  78. Experiment Station Work—V. Pp. 32.
  79. Experiment Station Work—VI. Pp. 28.
  80. The Peach Twig-borer. Pp. 16.
  81. Corn Culture in the South. Pp. 24.
  82. The Culture of Tobacco. Pp. 24.
  83. Tobacco Soils. Pp. 23.
  84. Experiment Station Work—VII. Pp. 32.
  85. Fish as Food. Pp. 30.
  86. Thirty Poisonous Plants. Pp. 32.
  87. Experiment Station Work—VIII. Pp. 32.
  88. Alkali Lands. Pp. 23.
  89. Cowpeas. Pp. 16.
  91. Potato Diseases and Treatment. Pp. 12.
  92. Experiment Station Work—IX. Pp. 30.
  93. Sugar as Food. Pp. 27.
  94. The Vegetable Garden. Pp. 24.
  95. Good Roads for Farmers. Pp. 47.
  96. Raising Sheep for Mutton. Pp. 48.
  97. Experiment Station Work—X. Pp. 32.
  98. Suggestions to Southern Farmers. Pp. 48.
  99. Insect Enemies of Shade Trees. Pp. 30.
  100. Hog Raising in the South. Pp. 40.
  101. Millets. Pp. 28.
  102. Southern Forage Plants. Pp. 48.
  103. Experiment Station Work—XI. Pp. 32.
  104. Notes on Frost. Pp. 24.
  105. Experiment Station Work—XII. Pp. 32.
  106. Breeds of Dairy Cattle. Pp. 48.
  107. Experiment Station Work—XIII. Pp. 32.
  108. Saltbushes. Pp. 20.
  109. Farmers’ Reading Courses. Pp. 20.
  110. Rice Culture in the United States. Pp. 28.
  111. Farmers’ Interest in Good Seed. Pp. 24.
  112. Bread and Bread Making. Pp. 39.
  113. The Apple and How to Grow it. Pp. 32.
  114. Experiment Station Work—XIV. Pp. 28.
  115. Hop Culture in California. Pp. 27.
  116. Irrigation in Fruit Growing. Pp. 48.
  117. Sheep, Hogs, and Horses in the Northwest. Pp. 28.
  118. Grape Growing in the South. Pp. 32.
  119. Experiment Station Work—XV. Pp. 31.
  120. Insects Affecting Tobacco. Pp. 32.
  121. Beans, Peas, and other Legumes as Food. Pp. 32.
  122. Experiment Station Work—XVI. Pp. 32.
  123. Red Clover Seed; Information for Purchasers. Pp. 11.
  124. Experiment Station Work—XVII. Pp. 32.
  125. Protection of Food Products from Injurious Temperatures. Pp. 26.
  126. Practical Suggestions for Farm Buildings. Pp. 48.
  127. Important Insecticides. Pp. 42.
  128. Eggs and Their Uses as Food. Pp. 32.
  129. Sweet Potatoes. Pp. 40.
  131. Household Tests for Detection of Oleomargarine and
       Renovated Butter. Pp. 11.
  132. Insect Enemies of Growing Wheat. Pp. 40.
  133. Experiment Station Work—XVIII. Pp. 32.
  134. Tree Planting in Rural School Grounds. Pp. 38.
  135. Sorghum Sirip Manufacture. Pp. 40.
  136. Earth Roads. Pp. 24.
  137. The Angora Goat. Pp. 48.
  138. Irrigation in Field and Garden. Pp. 40.
  139. Emmer: A Grain for the Semiarid Regions. Pp. 16.
  140. Pineapple Growing. Pp. 48.
  141. Poultry Raising on the Farm. Pp. 16.
  142. The Nutritive and Economic Value of Food. Pp. 48.
  143. The Confirmation of Beef and Dairy Cattle. Pp. 44.
  144. Experiment Station Work—XIX. Pp. 32.
  145. Carbon Bisulphid as an Insecticide. Pp. 28.
  146. Insecticides and Fungicides. Pp. 16.
  147. Winter Forage Crops for the South. Pp. 36.
  148. Celery Culture. Pp. 32.
  149. Experiment Station Work—XX. Pp. 32.
  150. Clearing New Land. Pp. 24.
  151. Dairying in the South. Pp. 48.
  152. Scabies in Cattle. Pp. 24.
  153. Orchard Enemies in the Pacific Northwest. Pp. 39.
  154. The Fruit Garden: Preparation and Care. Pp. 20.
  155. How Insects Affect Health in Rural Districts. Pp. 20.
  156. The Home Vineyard. Pp. 24.
  157. The Propagation of Plants. Pp. 24.
  158. How to Build Small Irrigation Ditches. Pp. 28.
  159. Scab in Sheep. Pp. 48.
  161. Practical Suggestions for Fruit Growers. Pp. 28.
  162. Experiment Station Work—XXI. Pp. 32.
  164. Rape as a Forage Crop. Pp. 16.
  165. Culture of the Silkworm. Pp. 32.
  166. Cheese making on the Farm. Pp. 16.
  167. Cassava. Pp. 32.
  168. Pearl Millet. Pp. 16.
  169. Experiment Station Work—XXII. Pp. 32.
  170. Principles of Horse Feeding Pp. 44.
  171. The Control of the Codling Moth. Pp. 24.
  172. Scale Insects and Mites on Citrus Trees. Pp. 43.
  173. Primer of Forestry. Pp. 48.
  174. Broom Corn. Pp. 32.
  175. Home Manufacture and Use of Unfermented Grape Juice. Pp. 16.
  176. Cranberry Culture. Pp. 20.
  177. Squab Raising. Pp. 32.
  178. Insects Injurious in Cranberry Culture. Pp. 32.
  179. Horseshoeing. Pp. 31.
  180. Game Laws for 1903. Pp. 56.
  181. Pruning. Pp. 39.
  182. Poultry as Food. Pp. 40.
  183. Meat on the Farm—Butchering, curing, etc.
  184. Marketing Live Stock. Pp. 40.
  185. Beautifying the Home Grounds.
  186. Experiment Station Work—XXIII. Pp. 32.
  187. Drainage of Farm Lands.




  TRANSCRIBER’S NOTE

  Illustrations in this eBook have been positioned between paragraphs
  and adjacent to the related discussion. In versions of this eBook
  that support hyperlinks, the page references in the List of
  Illustrations lead to the corresponding illustrations.

  Obvious typographical errors and punctuation errors have been
  corrected after careful comparison with other occurrences within the
  text and consultation of external sources.

  Some hyphens in words have been silently removed, some added, when a
  predominant preference was found in the original book.

  All misspellings in the text, and inconsistent or archaic usage, have
  been retained.